# 003 - Citra Smash

## Recipe

```
5.5%
BIAB, No Sparge
67% efficiency

Batch Volume: 10.3 L
Boil Time: 60 min
Mash Water: 16 L
Total Water: 16 L
Boil Volume: 14.25 L
Pre-Boil Gravity: 1.041

Original Gravity: 1.052
Final Gravity: 1.010
IBU (Tinseth): 61

Color: 9.9 EBC

Mash: 65 °C — 60 min

Malts

2.5 kg (100%) — Maris Otter Pale Malt — 5.9 EBC

Hops

10 g (31 IBU) — Citra 12% — Boil — 60 min
10 g (17 IBU) — Citra 12% — Boil — 15 min
30 g (13 IBU) — Citra 12% — Aroma — 20 min hopstand @ 80 °C

Yeast: 1 pkg — Fermentis US-05 Safale American
```

## Brewing

**Date**: 2019-11-28
**Room Temperature**: 19.9°C - 18.6°C

### Log

 - **20:53**: Began heating 16L (23cm depth in 30cm diameter pot) up to 70°C from a starting temp of 19C.
 - **21:28**: 70°C reached. Begin putting bag in pot and adding grains.
 - **21:32**: All 2.5kg of Maris Otter added to pot, stirred. Placed lid and tea towell on pot. 67°C.
 - **22:33**: 64°C. Remove bag. Drain into separate vessel by squeezing. Add collected water back to pot.
 - **22:40**: Pre-boil gravity 1.043. (Read 1.032 on hydrometer. 56°C in measuring tube).
 - **22:46**: Turn on heat to bring to boil. Lid on. 60°C. ~15.1L (21.4cm depth).
 - **23:09**: 92°C. Remove lid.
 - **23:16**: Add 60m hop addition.
 - **00:01**: Add 15m hop addition. Add immersion chiller.
 - **00:16**: Flameout. Turn on immersion chiller.
 - **00:19**: 79°C. Turn off immersion chiller. Add final hop addition for hopstand.
 - **00:39**: 72°C. Turn on immersion chiller.
 - **00:57**: 24-30°C. Remove immersion chiller. Rack to fermenter.
 - **01:14**: Just over 10L in fermenter. Aerate for 40s by shaking.
 - **01:19**: OG 1.052. (1.051 on hydrometer at 25°C).
 - **01:23**: Wort in fermenter is 24°C. Pitch yeast packet directly into fermenter. Shake gently to push under foam.
 - **02:00**: Clean up complete.

### Notes

 - Thought I'd started with 17L of water based on how many 1L jugs I'd poured in, but volume calculation said 16L. It's likely that I miscounted jugs. I will do a more accurate assessment of how big the pot is on a non-brew day, so that I can fill the pot with a hose rather than measuring out each litre.
 - With 16L of water, 2.5kg of grain and the bag the pot was full to the brim. I will need to do smaller batches in future.
 - Without insulation for the kettle, the mash dropped 3°C during the mash. I will invest in some insulation.
 - I forgot about temperature compensation for hydrometer readings and was initially worried about a very low pre-boil gravity.
 - I did not have a second vessel ready when removing the grains. I should prepare this before the mash is finished in future.
 - The grains in the bag were difficult to squeeze when hot. I will buy some gloves.
 - Transferring the wort from the kettle with the syphon (not auto!) was extremely painful. Accidentally picking up trub would block the syphon, which was difficult to restart. Some ChemSan dilution got into the wort. I poured from the kettle into the fermenter instead. I will get an auto-syphon.
 - I avoided pouring the trub from the kettle into the fermenter. This left about 2L of solids and liquids in the kettle. I would like to experiment with getting more of this into the fermenter in future to increase batch size.

